---
title: Have men really denied women access to education in the past?
date: 2024-07-30T00:00-03:00
description: Feminists often repeat the thesis that supposedly evil men prevented women from accessing education, considered them stupid and purposely prevented them from developing. But is it true? Let's get to the bottom of it.
previewText: ""
descrAsPreview: true
cover: /media/2024-have-men-really-denied-women-access-to-education-in-the-past.avif
coverDescr: The picture was generated by a neural network DALL·E 3
coverAlt: School in the 19th century
commentUrl: ""
authorId: ivan-k
tags:
  - history
---
## When did universal education come into being?

According to [Wikipedia](https://ru.wikipedia.org/wiki/%D0%92%D1%81%D0%B5%D0%BE%D0%B1%D1%89%D0%B5%D0%B5_%D0%BE%D0%B1%D1%80%D0%B0%D0%B7%D0%BE%D0%B2%D0%B0%D0%BD%D0%B8%D0%B5), universal education has not been around for very long by historical standards. The first country to adopt it was Germany in 1619, the next almost a hundred years later was Prussia in 1717. In many other countries, including the United States, universal education appeared only in the 19th century, and in Russia only in 1910. Both girls and boys could study.

Something does not agree with feminist statements that men throughout history have prevented women from getting an education.

And the truth is that for most of history there was no **system of education**, and when there was, both men and **women** could get it.

Moreover, in the early days of universal education, it was strongly associated with Christianity, and its main purpose was to teach both boys and **girls** to read scripture.

## And what happened before the advent of universal education?

There was education before that too, but it was not systematic, it was not standardized, and it was strongly tied to religion.

If we take [the history of education in Russia](https://ru.wikipedia.org/wiki/%D0%9E%D0%B1%D1%80%D0%B0%D0%B7%D0%BE%D0%B2%D0%B0%D0%BD%D0%B8%D0%B5_%D0%B2_%D0%A0%D0%BE%D1%81%D1%81%D0%B8%D0%B8) as an example, the first school for women opened in Kiev in 1086. **Once again, in 1086 fucking year! A school for girls! ** When there were no schools for boys. The beginning of state female education in Russia should be considered [1764](https://ru.wikipedia.org/wiki/1764_год), when the Smolny Institute for Noble Maidens was founded.

I think it's no secret that education was largely the domain of rich families, and ordinary peasants often had no education, **both girls and boys**.

## Muslims ##

It's worth mentioning Muslims separately, as feminists are very fond of claiming that women in Islamic countries have been very much disadvantaged throughout history and have not been educated at all.

&gt; The Prophet Muhammad said that "seeking knowledge is the duty of all Muslims".

I think this quote alone is enough to realize that education was very important to Muslims and was as much connected to religion as it was to Christians.

But here are more quotes from [islam.plus](https://islam.plus/ru/civilizaciya/history/obrazovanie-v-islamskoi-istorii).

&gt; Throughout its history, Islam has given an important role to the education of women. Women were not considered incapable of assimilating knowledge or teaching others. An example of an educated woman is the Prophet's wife Aisha, who was one of the leading scholars of her time, a renowned teacher in Medina after the Prophet's death.

&gt; In subsequent Islamic history, there are also examples of women's influence. Everywhere in the Muslim world, women could attend lectures in mosques, study in madrasas, and often were teachers themselves. For example, the twelfth-century scholar Ibn Asakir (best known for his book on the history of Damascus, Tarikh Dimashq) traveled extensively in search of knowledge, and among his many teachers were some 80 women.

I think comments here are simply unnecessary.

## What are the lies of feminists? ##

1. they lied that for the entire history of mankind women were not allowed to be educated.
2. they conceal that the vast majority of men as well as women were uneducated, since education until the 19th century was mainly available only to the nobility and wealthy families
3. they draw the false parallel that if women were supposedly disadvantaged in history, they are still disadvantaged now.
4. they conceal that women from rich families had a very good education and had access to all the knowledge of the world, they knew ancient philosophy and history, literature and many other things that were simply not available to other women and men from poor families.
5. And most importantly rich women of the past did not care at all about poor women's access to education, this issue was of concern exclusively to men, such as famous figures of the Age of Enlightenment. **Rich women didn't care about poor uneducated women and considered them second class**. And this is another lie of feminists who demonize men - it wasn't really men who thought women were second-class citizens, it was **rich women who thought peasant women were dirt underfoot**.

## Why do feminists need it?

### Obviously to make men feel guilty ###

It's one of the most effective enslavement techniques. Just like a wife makes her husband feel guilty for something he didn't do. As soon as he apologizes for something that the woman did, she will rejoice, because that moment means taking complete control and gaining power over the man and enslaving him.

Likewise, feminists indoctrinate the entire male half of humanity with guilt for something that men did not do. You've probably seen or heard of performances in which men apologize to feminists for centuries of oppression of women. But it turns out that there was no oppression, it was invented by feminists and they tricked men into apologizing for the invented oppression.

In general, the main purpose of making men feel guilty is to gain unquestioned power over all men.

### The second goal is to create the illusion that women are still oppressed and that they need to do everything they can to remedy the situation.

Firstly, this is how they set a high priority for issues of women's privilege so that society and governments of different countries prioritize these issues.

And secondly, if people believe that women are disadvantaged, and in conditions where women are not only not disadvantaged, but have privileges unlike men, then it is possible to make people strive to make women's lives even better and give them much more privileges than they have now. At the same time to make men's life worse and deprive them of basic rights, because they are "exploiters of women", their life is already sugar. That is, in other words, to make the disadvantaged and enslaved class of men fight against themselves and for giving their masters even more privileges than they have.

## Did women want to have an education?

And at the end, let's ask ourselves an interesting question: do women really want and need to be educated?

If you watch short videos in social networks, then perhaps you, as well as me, have come across videos with surveys of women on the topic of work and education. So the women in these videos themselves say that they do not want to work, moreover, they do not want to study. They say: why should I study, if I don't want to work, I will just find a man who will provide for me, and if he can't provide, goes bankrupt or gets sick, I will find another man who will be able and willing to devote his life to providing for me.

That's the answer to the question of whether women need education. And do not think that women's unwillingness to have education and work appeared only now, they were very comfortable throughout history to parasitize on men. Why would they want to strain their brains, sit over textbooks, if they are not going to work? Why should they work if they get full security and safety from men? For the women themselves, the answer is simple: they don't have to.

**Not getting an education and not working is the choice of women**, not the evil men who are supposedly conspiring to deprive women of education and the opportunity to work.
